---
title: UCUM Board of Advisors
post_excerpt: UCUM's BoA is a small set of subject matter experts who guide UCUM's development.
---

The Unified Code for Units of Measure was founded in 1999 by Gunther Schadow then under the supervision of Clement J. McDonald. For this reason, Gunther Schadow and Clem McDonald are ex-officio members of the Board of Advisors. Other members of the Board of Advisors have been recruited from a very small set of individuals who have over the years expressed interest and demonstrated expertise in the subject and have supported the UCUM project with their advice, advocacy, and expertise in the semantic domain of units of measures.

## Simon Cox, PhD

Dr. Cox trained in geology and geophysics, starting his research career studying the mechanical properties of rocks in the laboratory. He is a leader in geospatial interoperability standards, including information modeling, data exchange standards, spatial data infrastructures, vocabularies and semantic web technologies. Dr. Cox is temporarily based in the Spatial Data Infrastructures Unit at the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission in northern Italy, working on harmonisation of several international geospatial initiatives. At CSIRO he most recently was project leader for Water Data Transfer Standards, and standards manager for AuScope GRID (National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy). Dr Cox was awarded the 2006 Gardels Medal by the Open Geospatial Consortium. Dr. Cox and the Open Geospatial Consortium had been very early supporters of UCUM and in fact the first formal adopters outside of the field of medicine.

## Dr. Christof Gessner, PhD

Dr. Gessner has his PhD in Physics/Chemistry and academic training in Medical Physics and Medical Informatics. For many years, Dr. Gessner held positions in hospitals and with vendors of medical devices and software. Since 2008 he is an expert consultant for medical informatics standards and terminologies, including HL7®, LOINC®. Dr. Gessner has contributed to UCUM since early 2006. He is a member of the Medical Standards Committee of DIN (the german national standardization body) and a delegate to ISO TC 215. In 2010 he has been appointed by the DIN terminology comittee as a delegate to ISO TC 12, the international authority on units of measures.

## William A. Hess, CAPT (ret.) USPHS

Captain Hess is a Pharmacist and member and subject matter expert to (1) FDA Product Risk Ranking Team, (2) FDA Data Standards Council, (3) VA National Drug File Reference Terminology Interagency Expert Panel, (4) Federal Healthcare Information Technology Standards Organization Participation Work Group, (5) HITSP Foundations Medical Terminology Work Group, (6) Technical Advisory Group for Structured Product Labeling Indexing Contract, (7) White House Consolidated Health Informatics Medication Domain Expert Work Group, Allergy Domain Expert Work Group, Chemical Domain Expert Work Group, an (8) All five HITSP ARRA Tiger Teams. He is an FDA Liaison to the FDA/NLM Interagency Agreement for the Photography and Image Processing of Prescription Solid Dosage Form Medications, and to the USP Expert Committees on (1) Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms, (2) Nomenclature, Safety, and Labeling, and (3) Therapeutic Information and Formulary Support. He provides vocabulary and database design consultation to FDA scientific reviewers and database engineers. He serves as principal FDA scientific nomenclature representative and subject matter expert to other United States government agencies, to foreign government agencies, and to private agencies. He is responsible for developing, establishing, and implementing Agency nomenclature policy and standards as well as Agency indexing policy and standards. These standards are used worldwide in electronic submissions, electronic labeling, electronic prescribing, and the electronic health record. On the UCUM board of advisers he is the liaison to FDA.

## Gunther Schadow, MD, PhD (founder, chairman)

Dr. Schadow has created the intellectual foundation of the Unified Code for Units of Measure while working on his PhD project in the interoperability of clinical laboratory results in 1996 at the Free University Berlin. In 1998 Dr. Schadow joined the Regenstrief Institute to work on Dr. McDonald's team where he refined the work on the units of measure terminology and eventually released the UCUM as a public specification. Dr. Schadow had been instrumental for the design and penetration of many of the newer HL7 version 3 specifications, both foundational standards, as the Reference Information Model (RIM) and HL7 data types specification, both of which have become ISO standards, as well as applied standards, such as the HL7 Structured Product Labeling (SPL) and Common Product Model, and more recently the HL7 Chemical Substances specification standard. These standards have revolutionized the way that drug knowledge is maintained and shared in the U.S.A., and have become a core part of ISO international standards on the identification of medicinal products. Dr. Schadow is a member of the IUPAC division VII sub-committe on Nomenclature of Properties and Units (NPU).


## Clement J. McDonald, MD (founder)

Dr. McDonald is associated with the Board of Advisors as liaison to the National Library of Medicine (NLM). Dr. McDonald is a legend in medical informatics, one of the few pioneers of the field in the late 1960. He is the scientific "father" of the Regenstrief Institute where he has been relentlessly pushing an agenda of improving health care through information technology. He has built the largest and longest running electronic medical record system which is now serving the entire state of Indiana. To pursue these goals, Dr. McDonald had realized the need for medical information standards. He is the father of ASTM 1238, the first standard for communicating clinical and laboratory measurement results, and the clinical observation reporting and ordering components of HL7. Dr. McDonald also took on the challenge to create a terminology system for clinical observation results, the Logical Observation Identifiers, Names, and Codes (LOINC) while cooperating with other pioneers in this field world wide. Today Dr. McDonald is director of the Lister Hill Center of the U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM). Dr. McDonald is a member of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) division VII sub-committee for Nomenclature of Properties and Units (NPU) where he currently works with the world's experts on the second revised edition of the IUPAC "Silver Book", the authority in the field of metrology in medicine. Dr. McDonald has been a vital supporter of the work that led to the Unified Code for Units of Measure.

## Daniel J. Vreeman, DPT

Dr. Daniel Vreeman is a physical therapist, biomedical informatician, and expert in health data standards. His work aims to create a global health ecosystem where data is available with open standards that unlock the potential for information systems and applications to improve health decision-making and care. Dr. Vreeman is the Chief Standards Development Officer at HL7 International where he leads the development of standards to advance health data interoperability. Dr. Vreeman is an interoperability expert who has developed internationally adopted health data standards, implemented them in multi-institutional health IT systems, evaluated their use, and provided strategic advice to interoperability initiatives of numerous U.S. federal agencies and national eHealth efforts in several other countries.
